This document describes the disk formats used in the Alto File System. It also describes a "disk object," a
Bcpl software construct that is used to interface low-level disk drivers with packages that implement
higher-level objects, such as streams.
The primary focus of the description will be for the "standard" Alto disks: either (1) up to 2 Diablo Model
31 disk drives or (2) one Diablo Model 44 disk drive. The low-level drivers for these disks are called "Bfs"
(Basic File System). With minor modifications, the description below applies to the Trident Model T80
and T300 disk drives, when formatted for Alto file system conventions. The differences are flagged with
the string [Trident]. Low-level drivers for the Trident disks are called "Tfs."
1. Distribution
Relocatable binary files for the BFS are kept in <Alto>BFSBrs.dm. The sources, command files, and test
program (described later in this document) are kept in <AltoSource>BFSSources.dm Relocatable binary
files for the TFS are kept in <Alto>TFS.dm; sources are kept on <AltoSource>TFSSources.dm.
2. File and Disk Structure
This section describes the conventions of the Alto file system. The files AltoFileSys.D and Bfs.D contain
Bcpl structure declarations that correspond to this description ([Trident]: See also "Tfs.D").
The unit of transfer between disk and memory, and hence that of the file system, is the disk sector. Each
sector has three fields: a 2-word header, an 8-word label, and a 256-word data page. ([TfidentJ: The fields
are a 2-word header, a 10-word label, and a 1024-word data page.)
A sector is identified by a disk address; there are two kinds of disk addresses, real and virtual. The
hardware deals in real addresses, which have a somewhat arbitrary format. An unfortunate consequenceis
that the real addresses for all the pages on a disk unit are sparse in the set of 16 bit integers. To correct this
defect, virtual addresses have been introduced. They have the property that the pages of a disk unit which
holds n pages have virtual addresses 0 (n-1). Furthermore, the ordering of pages by virtual address is
such that successive pages in the virtual space are usually sequential on the disk. As a result, assigning a
sequence of pages to consecutive virtual addresses will ensure that they can be read in as fast as possible.
2.1. Legal Alto Files
An Alto file is a data structure that contains two sorts of information: some is mandatory, and is required
for all legal files; the remainder is "hints". Programs that operate on files should endeavor to keep the
hints accurate, but should never depend on the accuracy of a hint.
A legal Alto file consists of a sequence of pages held together by a doubly-linked list recorded in the label
fields. Each label contains the mandatory information:
The forward and backward links, recorded as real disk addresses.
A page number which gives the position of the page in the file; pages are numbered from 0.
A count of the number of characters of data in the page (numchars). This may range from 0 (for a
Disks & I3fs A u g u s t 10, 1980 5 2
completely empty page) to 512 (for a completely full page). ([Trident]: A full page contains 2048
characters.)
A real file id, which is a three-word unique identifier for the file. The user normally deals with virtual
file ids (see the discussion of file pointers, below), which are automatically converted into real file ids
when a label is needed.
Three bits in the file id deserve special mention:
Directory: This bit is on if the file is itself a directory file. This information is used by the disk
Scavenger when trying to re-build a damaged disk data structure.
Random: This bit is currently unused.
NoLog: This bit is no longer used, but many existing files are likely to have it set.
Leader Page: Page 0 of a file is called the leader page; it contains no file data, but only a collection of file
properties, all of which are hints. The structure LD in AltoFileSys.D declares the format of a leader page,
which contains the following standard items:
The file name, a hint so that the Scavenger can enter this file in a directory if it is not already in one.
The times for creation, last read and last write, interpreted as follows:
A file's creation date is a stamp generated when the information in the file is created. When a
file is copied (without modification), the creation date should be copied with it. When a file
is modified in any way (either in-place or as a result of being overwritten by newly-created
information), a new creation date should be generated.
A file's write date is updated whenever that file is physically written on a given file system.
A file's read date is updated whenever that file is physically read from within a given file
system.
A pointer to the directory in which the file is thought to be entered (zeroes imply the system
directory SysDir).
A "hint" describing the last page of the file.
A "consecutive" bit which is a hint that the pages of the file lie at consecutive virtual disk addresses.
The changeSerial field related to version numbering: whenever a new version of a file "foo" is
made, the changeSerial field of all other files "foo" (i.e., older versions) is incremented. Thus, a
program that wishes to be sure that it is using the most recent version of a file can verify that
changeSerial = 0. I f a program keeps an FP as a hint for a file, and is concerned about the relative
position of that file in the list of version numbers, it can also keep and verify the changeSerial entry
of the file. Version numbers have been deimplemented.
These standard items use up about 40 words of the leader page. The remaining space is available for
storing other information iri blocks which start with a one word header containing type and length fields.
A zero terminates the list. The structure FPROP in AltoFileSys.d defines the header format. The only
standard use of this facility is to record the logical shape of the disk in the leader page of SysDir.
Data: The first data byte of a file is the first byte of page 1.
In a legal file with n pages, the label field of page i must contain:
A next link with the real disk address of page (i + 1), or 0 if i = n-1.
A previous link with the real disk address of page (i-1), or 0 if i = O.
Disks & Bfs A u g u s t 10, 1980 5 3
A page number between 0 and (n-1), inclusive.
A numchars word = 512 if i<n-1, and <512 if i =n 1. The last page must not be completely full.
(ridden* = 2048 if i<n-1, and <2048 if i = n-1.)
A real file id which is the same for every page in the file, and different from the real file id of any other
file on the disk.
A file is addressed by an object called a file pointer (FP), which is declared in AltoFileSys.D. A filepointer
contains a virtual file id, and also the virtual address of the leader page of the file. The low-level disk
routines construct a real file id from the virtual one when they must deal with a disk label. Since it is
possible for the user to read a label from the disk and examine its contents, the drivers also provides a
routine which will convert the real file id in the label into a file pointer (of course, the leader address will
not be filled in).
Note: Real disk address 0 (equal virtual disk address 0) cannot be part of any legal Alto file because the
value 0 is reserved to terminate the forward and backward chains in sector labels. However, disk address0
is used for "booting" the Alto: when the boot key is pressed when no keyboard keys are down, sector Ois
read in as a bootstrap loader. The normal way to make a file the "boot file" is to first create a legal Alto file
with the bootstrap loader as the first data page (page 1), and then to copy this page (label and data) into
disk sector 0. Thus the label in sector 0 points forward to the remainder of the boot file.
2.2. Legal Alto Disks
A legal disk is one on which every page is either part of a legal file, or free, or "permanently bad." A free
page has a file id of all ones, and the rest of its label is indeterminate. A permanently bad page has a file id
with each of the three words set to -2, and the remainder of the label indeterminate.
2.3. Alto Directory Files
A directory is a file for associating string names and FP's. It has the directory bit set in its file id, and has
the following format (structure DV declared in AltoFileSys.D).
It is a sequence of entries. An entry contains a header and a body. The length field of the header tells how
many words there arc in the entry, including the header. The interpretation of the body depends on the
type, recorded in the header.
dvTypeFrce= 0: free entry. The body is uninterpreted.
dvTypeFile =1: file entry. The body consists of a file pointer, followed by a Bcpl string containing the
name of the file. The file name must contain only upper and lower case letters, digits, and characters
in the string "+-.!$". They must terminate with a .period (".") and not be longer than maxLengthFn
characters. I f there are an odd number of bytes in the name, the "garbage byte" must be O. The
interpretation of exclamation mark (!) is special; if a file name ends with ! followed only by digits (and
the mandatory "."), the digits specify a file version number.
The main directory is a file with its leader page stored in the disk page with virtual address 1. There isan
entry for the main directory in the main directory, with the name SysDir. All other directories can be
reached by starting at the main directory.
2.4. Disk Descriptor
There is a file called DiskDescriptor entered in the main directory which contains a disk descriptor
structure which describes the disk and tells which pages are free. The disk descriptor has two parts: a 16
word header which describes the shape of the disk, and a bit table indexed by virtual disk address. The
declaration of the header structure is in AltoFileSys.D.
Disks & 13fs A u g u s t 10, 1980 5 4
The "defaultVersionsKept" entry in the DiskDescriptor records the number of old versions of files that
should be retained by the system. I f this entry is 0, no version accounting is done: new files simply replace
old ones. Version numbers have been deimplemented.
The entry in the disk descriptor named "freePages" is used to maintain a count of free pages on the disk.
This is a hint about a hint: it is computed when a disk is opened by counting the bits in the bit table, and
then incrementing and decrementing as pages arc released and allocated. However the hit table is itself
just a collection of hints, as explained below.
The bit table contains a "1" corresponding to each virtual disk address that is believed to be occupied bya
file, and "0" for free addresses. These values are, however, only hints. Programs that assign new pages
should check to be sure that a page thought to be free is indeed so by reading the label and checking tosee
that it describes a free page. (The WriteDiskPages and CreateDiskFile procedures in the disk object
perform this checking for you.
